Detection of Traces of Ovalbumin and Casein
in White and Red Wines by Quantitative Western Blotting
Philippe Meyer and Simone Zanetti
Abstract: Fining of wine with agents containing cow¡¦s milk or hen¡¦s egg white is a common and traditional procedure. In light of increasing food allergies all over the world, the presence of fining residues has been subject of intense debate. Switzerland does not make exception, and since 2009 the Federal Department of Home Affairs has modified its food regulations stating that the labels must show if traces of fining agents are present. Nevertheless, the application of this regulation is not based on an official analytical method. In this study we show that immunoblotting is an efficient technique to detect and quantify ovalbumin and casein residues in bottled wine. We showed that final filtration is an essential step to remove finings in red wine, and that overfining of white wine may result in fining residues in finished products. Finally, for the first time in Switzerland, 22 samples were taken by food safety inspectors and officially analyzed for the regional food control authority of the Canton of Vaud. These samples were allergen free, but a larger study is currently planned in collaboration with other regional authorities of Switzerland to complete these results and make a complete picture of the Swiss wine production.
Keywords: caseins, food allergy, immunoblotting, ovalbumin, wine fining

Practical Application: Development of an analytical method for the search of allergenic traces in wine. Fining agents commonly used by wine growers for the clarification of wines might be allergenic to a part of the population. This method can be easily applied in biochemistry laboratories.¡@
Introduction
¡@Nowadays in Europe, food allergies concern more than 17 million people (source EAACI). Cow¡¦s milk and hen¡¦s eggs are among the most common causes of allergies to food. It is a large-scale problem where consumers try to avoid food-containing allergens, industries produce new allergen-free products, public organizations promote prevention campaigns and food control authorities develop new regulations to protect consumers¡¦ health.
¡@Fining agents for the clarification of wine are commonly composed of milk or egg proteins. Thus, the allergenic potential of residual finings in wine has been investigated, but no clear evidence has been found, and the danger for an allergic reaction to wine has been classified as probably negligible (Rolland and others 2006; Vassilopoulou and others 2011). Despite these studies, a possible danger could not be completely excluded and led numerous countries to modify their food regulations.
¡@In Switzerland, grape production plays an important role in agriculture, and roughly 840000 hL of must is produced every year. According to the Federal Statistical Office (FSO ¡V Grape Harvest 2013), about 25% of must is produced in the Canton of Vaud. The consumption of wine is also part of the culture in Switzerland, and on average 2663129 hL (mean of last 10 y) of wine is consumed per year by the adult resident population:
6486120 persons over 20 y old (sources: FSO, December 31,
MS 20150502 Submitted 3/24/2015, Accepted 7/6/2015. Author Zanetti is with Service de la consommation et des affaires vet? erinaires, chemin des Boveresses 155,? CH-1066 Epalinges, Switzerland. Author Meyer is with Service de l¡¦agriculture, Laboratoire d¡¦?nologie, Avenue de Marcelin 29, CH-1110, Morges, Switzerland.
Direct inquiries to author Zanetti (E-mail: simoneznt@gmail.com).
2013). Numerous aspects such as viticulture, appellations, certifications, commerce and import of wine are strictly regulated by the Swiss Ordinance on Viticulture and the Importation of Wine (Ordonnance sur le Vin). Furthermore, since May 25, 2009, a modification from the Federal Dept. of Home Affairs (RO 2009 2025) of the Ordinance on Food Labeling and Advertising (OEDAI) states that any allergenic ingredient present in the final product (alcoholic beverages included: Art. 8, Al. 8) must be indicated and must be clearly visible and identifiable on the label of the product.
¡@At present, the most commonly used technique for the research of allergenic residues in wine is the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), which is the method described by the Organization of Vine and Wine (OIV). In this context, an important study is currently being carried out by the Swiss Federal Research Station Agroscope to evaluate the commercially available ELISA kits (Rosti J., personal communication). Alternatively, a chemical? analysis has also been explored using mass-spectrometry (Monaci and others 2010, 2011, 2013; Losito and others 2013; Mattarozzi and others 2014; Pilolli and others 2014).
¡@Because the Swiss Food Regulations do not dictate an official method, the purpose in this study is to propose a method that can be used by the official food control authorities in Switzerland. To this end, the method has to be applicable to a large number of samples, but more importantly, it has to be reproducible, reliable, applicable with no need of very expensive equipment, and based on basic laboratory methods. A precise quantification is considered an advantage, as it is not required by the Swiss Food Regulations. To reach our goal we developed a method based on immunoblotting, which meets most of the quality criteria listed above.
Vol. 00, Nr. 0, 2015
Materials and Methods
Wine samples and fining agents
¡@Wine samples were produced following the standard winemaking processes. As standards, we used Pinot noir as red wine and Chasselas as white wine. In fact these are the most commonly grapes grown in the Canton of Vaud (source: Cantonal Office of Viticulture, OCVP). The fining agents used during this study are common fining agents used in Europe and Switzerland for wine clarification: Blancoll (enartis), Ovocol (Martin Vialatte ?nologie), Protoclar (enartis), Formule 1 (oenofrance) and skim milk powder. Eighteen white wines and 18 red wines were prepared at the Oenology Laboratory of the Agriculture Service with known concentration of casein (20 mL/hL, 40 mL/hL and 100 mL/hL) and ovalbumin (0.5 g/hL, 2 g/hL and 5 g/hL). These samples were then filtered over Fibrafix depth filter sheets AF 15 (20 to 8.0 £gm), AF 71H (3.0 to 1.5 £gm) or AF ST 130 (0.6 to 0.4 £gm), respectively for coarse, fine and sterile filtration. In addition to the samples prepared with known fining, 22 samples corresponding to bottled wines that were taken in grocery stores of the Canton of Vaud were also examined. For Figure 6, we used a fining-free Merlot prepared at the Oenology Laboratory and a Merlot obtained in a wine cellar of the Canton Ticino.
Protein samples preparation
¡@All reagents used were of analytical grade, matrix calibration was performed by Bio-Rad and the equipment was submitted to the quality standard of accreditation ISO 17025. The precipitation method was adapted from Mastro and Hall (1999). A required volume of acetone:methanol (8:1) solution was prepared and stored at ¡V20 ¢XC. A volume of sample was mixed by vortexing with 3 to 9 volumes of acetone:methanol solution. If not specified differently, we used 180 £gL of sample for the analysis of ovalbumin precipitated with 7 volumes of acetone:methanol, and 1400 £gL of sample precipitated with 9 volumes of acetone:methanol for the analysis of casein. The samples were incubated for at least 16 h at ¡V20 ¢XC and centrifuged at 4 ¢XC, 11000 rpm for 30 min. The supernatant was discarded and the sample air-dried for 2 min. The pellet was resuspended in the required volume of water. For direct electrophoresis, samples were resuspended in 20 £gL of water and 30 £gL of 3x Laemmli sample buffer (Laemmli 1970). For additional purification, samples were resuspended in 100 £gL water and then processed with the ReadyPrep 2-D Cleanup Kit from Bio-Rad following the manufacturer¡¦s instructions. Samples were finally prepared for electrophoresis as described above.
Antibodies and Western Blotting
¡@Anti-ovalbumin HRP conjugate antibodies PA1-46448 (Pierce) and anti-ovalbumin antibodies ab186717 (abcam) were used. Polyclonal anti-casein antibodies were raised in rabbit against the fining agent Protoclar, which is principally composed of £\-casein and £]-casein. The production of these antibodies was carried out by the company Eurogentec using the ¡§Speedy 28-d polyclonal package.¡¨ For Western blotting, protein samples were loaded on a 1.5 mm SDS PAGE gel, 8% or 10% for the analysis of ovalbumin or casein, respectively. Samples were stacked at 70 V for 15 min and then migrated at 90 V in the stacking gel. Migration in the running gel was performed at 150 V until the blue band of the sample buffer was out of the gel. Proteins were transferred onto a Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane with the Trans-Blot SD semi-dry Transfer cell of Bio-Rad (2h, 25 V, 300 mA, 300 W).
Antiovalbumin and anti-casein primary antibodies were diluted 1:3000 in 5% Blotto/Tween (ovalbumin) and 3% BSA blocking buffer (casein). If needed, secondary goat-anti-rabbit HRP IgG conjugates were used 1:10000 (Pierce). The peqGOLD ProteinMarker IV was used to determine the molecular weight of the proteins, and antibodies were revealed with the Clarity ECL Western Blotting Substrate (Bio-Rad). Images were taken with the ChemiDoc MP, and the quantifications were performed using the software ImageLab V5.0 from Bio-Rad. The concentration of the residual proteins in the samples needs to be calculated on the basis of the reference points.
Results and Discussion
Detection limit of anti-ovalbumin antibodies
¡@Two polyclonal antibodies anti-ovalbumin were equivalent in specificity and detection limit: ab186717 and PA1-46448. For simplicity, we used the anti-ovalbumin HRP conjugate antibodies PA1-46448 for subsequent experiments, exception made for Figure 6. The detection limit (LOD) of the anti-ovalbumin antibodies is 5 ng of fining agent, detected as a single product (Figure 1). Furthermore, the antibodies did not bind to the proteins contained in Blotto/Tween and BSA Blocking buffer (not shown), but specifically recognize the ovalbumin contained in Ovocol and Blancoll with the same detection limit for both (Figure 1). This specificity for ovalbumin precludes the possibility of detecting impurities in the fining agents that might also cause an allergenic problem, such as ovomucoid or ovotransferin. As the minimal eliciting dose is very variable in patients and can be of few micrograms (Zhu and others 2015), it is very difficult to determine what is important in light of an allergenic reaction. However, since ovalbumin represents the 54% of egg proteins (Benhamou and others 2010), we thus considered that this protein is the more appropriate to search for the presence of residual egg proteins in wine, and that the impurities of fining agents can be neglected in the absence of ovalbumin.
¡@In order to evaluate the possibility to use Western Blotting as a quantitative method, we tested the linearity of detection between 5 and 100 ng (Figure 1). Even if the quantification is approximate due to the manual subtraction of the background, the linearity of

Figure 1¡V Detection of 5 ng of fining agents by the anti-ovalbumin antibodies. The commercially available antibodies against ovalbumin (PA146448) are very sensitive and detect ovalbumin in 5 ng of the fining agents Ovocol (A) and Blancoll (B). (C, D) The quantification of the different bands showsalinearcorrelation(R2)between5and100ngforbothfiningagents. X-axis corresponds to ng indicated in the corresponding upper panel; Y-axis represents the volume of the signal in millions of pixels. For example, the band of the 5 ng has been quantified at 82296 pixels.
detection is respected between 5 and 100 ng for both Ovocol (c) and Blancoll (d). Thus, an amount of 45 ng of ovalbumin would be reliably detected and quantified. We therefore considered a targeted amount of 45 ng of ovalbumin for the further development of the method.
¡@According to our data, commercially available anti-ovalbumin antibodies are very sensitive and specific. Furthermore, we observed a linear detection and propose a possible quantitative estimation of the target protein. For all of these reasons, we consider the Western Blotting technique to be a good alternative to ELISA and MS-based methods for the detection and the quantification of residual ovalbumin in wine.
Specificity and detection limit of anti-casein antibodies
¡@For the development of a Western Blot technique for the quantification of casein, we raised antibodies against the fining agent Protoclar, which is mainly composed of £\-casein and £]-casein (Figure 2A). Other impurities of the fining agents were not considered, as these two proteins represent the 70% of the milk proteins (Caira and others 2012). The anti-casein antibodies obtained were not as sensitive as the antibodies against ovalbumin. Nevertheless the detection limit and the specificity were sufficient for our purpose. On one hand, the anti-casein antibodies did not bind to proteins contained in the BSA Blocking buffer (not shown).
On the other hand, the antibodies recognized both £\-casein and £]-casein and have a detection limit (LOD) of about 100 ng of fining agent (Figure 2A). The real detection limit is difficult to estimate, because we always used fining agents that contained both casein forms (Figure 2), thus reducing the sensitivity. In fact, the 100 ng described as a detection limit corresponds to the sum of both bands. The protein amount of the single band of £\casein in the 100 ng lane was estimated to be approximately 25 ng (Figure 2A). Even though the in-house antibodies were raised against Protoclar, the specificity for the casein isoforms was maintained for other commonly used fining agents such as skim milk (b) and Formule 1(c). As for ovalbumin, we asked whether the detection of the fining agents could be quantified and if this quantification could be used to estimate the protein content of a wine sample. To answer this question, we loaded different amounts of fining agents and quantified the different bands (Figure 2A to C). In 2D) the quantification of the bands from the 500 ng lane of Protoclar is shown as an example. The quantification is not precise because of the manual adjustment of the background. However, there is a linear correlation between signal and amount of protein between 100 and 500 ng of fining agents (Figure 2E to G), and a quantitative approach can be considered. In this case, the targeted amount of the protein for the further development of the method needs to be adjusted to values of approximately 350 ng.

¡@In summary, the Western Blotting method for the detection of residual casein in wine can be considered as a possibility. In fact we can rely on antibodies, that have a detection limit of about 100 ng and that are specific to the major forms of casein contained in bovine milk.
Wine samples preparation
¡@The anti-ovalbumin and anti-casein antibodies detect 5 and 100 ng of fining agent respectively, but the amount of sample that can be easily loaded on an SDS-PAGE gel is limited to about 60 £gL. Furthermore, several compounds that can be found in wine, such as phenols and tannins, can perturb the migration and the transfer of proteins on polyvinylidene diflouride (PVDF) membrane. For these reasons, samples need to be precipitated and purified. As the volume of sample that needs to be precipitated is directly proportional to the amount of protein that can be detected on the membrane, the volume required for the analysis of ovalbumin is lower than the volume required for the detection of casein. Because of the absence of lipids, the acetone:methanol precipitation protocol appears to be efficient to concentrate and desalt wine proteins (Mastro and Hall 1999). We observed that glycerol, which is highly present in wine as product of yeast fermentation (Styger and others 2011), is also concentrated with this protocol (not shown). As a consequence, this precipitation protocol is efficient on samples with a volume smaller than 300 £gL (ovalbumin). Due to the high glycerol content, larger volumes need an additional purification step to dissolve the precipitated sample in water or other buffers. This purification is performed with the ReadyPrep 2-D Cleanup Kit from Bio-Rad following the manufacturer¡¦s instructions. To test precipitation efficiency, one fixed volume (1.400 £gL) of wine sample was spiked with 350 ng of Protoclar and mixed with increasing volumes of acetone:methanol. The protein precipitation efficiency was compared to a lane where 350 ng of Protoclar were loaded as a reference (Figure 3). We observed that the precipitation efficiency for samples of red wine increases proportionally with the amount of solvent added (Figure 3). In contrast, the precipitation efficiency for white wine was less dependent on the amount of the solution added and was stable around 50% of precipitated proteins (Figure 3).
¡@In summary, the best protein precipitation efficiency of roughly 50% was obtained by mixing one volume of sample to nine volumes of acetone:methanol solution. In this study, we have shown that the detection limits are respectively 5 and 100 ng for ovalbumin and casein. We therefore propose 45 ng for ovalbumin and 350 ng for casein as target amount of proteins to be clearly detected and quantified. Considering a 50% of protein loss due to the precipitation efficiency, the amount of protein loaded on gel after the sample preparation will still be higher than the LOD of the antibodies, 5 ng for ovalbumin and 100 ng for casein, respectively. In Europe, the Regulation (EU) 2012 in conjunction with article 120 of Regulation (EU) 2007 amended in 2009, sets the threshold to 0.25 mg/L for allergens to be labeled. In our study, despite the fact that the Swiss Food Regulation does not set a threshold OEDAI, we decided to target the same amount of protein. Thus, considering the proposed targeted amount of proteins (45 and 350 ng) to reach the 0.25 mg/L threshold required in the European Regulation, we decided to set the sample volumes to be analyzed at 180 £gL for residual ovalbumin and 1400 £gL for residual casein. Using a spiked sample at 0.25 mg/L as reference point, and a crossing point using a blank sample to evaluate the level of background, we propose a relative quantification method using immunoblotting.
Red wine fining agents elimination by fine filtration
¡@The more limiting aspect of Western Blotting is the number of samples that can be analyzed per membrane. For this reason, in this report we show figures with single assays, despite the fact that scientific standard requires that at least duplicates are carried out for every sample. In fact, the results shown in Figure 4 and 5 represent the results obtained using duplicates for the quantification. Furthermore, positive results were confirmed by independent analysis to have statistically relevant results for the quantification.
¡@For this study, we selected an untreated Pinot noir as a red wine (Blank control) and prepared 18 experimental wines that were treated with 3 different amounts of 2 different fining agents. Ovocol was used at 0.5, 2, and 5 g/hL, and skim milk was used at 20, 40, and 100 mL/hL. Filtration was performed on 3 different filter sheets with increasing retention: AF 15, AF 71H, or AF ST 130, respectively for coarse, fine and sterile filtration. As positive control, the untreated wine was spiked with the targeted amount of fining agent: 45 ng for ovalbumin and 350 ng for casein. This sample was then processed in parallel to the other samples to be tested: precipitation ¡V purification (if required) ¡V loading ¡V migration ¡V transfer and quantification. Membranes that were loaded with both internal controls can be used to make an estimated relative quantification using two points of reference: blank = 0 ng and spiked wine = 0.25 mg/L.
¡@In red wine samples, the fining agents were completely removed by fine and sterile filtration (Figure 4). Even though these results are consistent with previous findings on ovalbumin (Deckwart

Figure 3¡V Protein precipitation efficiency. A total 1400 £gL of red and white wines are contaminated with 350 ng of skim milk. One volume of sample was precipitated with 3, 6, or 9 volumes of cold acetone:methanol (8:1). (A) Samples were precipitated with the different precipitation protocols (1:3, 1:6, 1:9) and the quantity of protein precipitated is compared with the 350ngreferencelane.Theefficiencyofproteinprecipitationisabout50%. (B) The chart represents the quantification of the corresponding lanes of the upper panel. The Y-axis corresponds to the percentage of precipitation efficiency. Light gray, £\-casein; gray, £]-casein; black, sum of both caseins.
and others 2014), we expected some residual proteins in samples prepared with excessive doses of fining agents. Interestingly, we show in this study that this finding is true for both types of fining agents, and is independent of the amount of fining agent used (Figure 4). The coarse filtration is less efficient, and fining residues estimated at about 0.02 mg/L of ovalbumin could be found in samples prepared with 2 g/hL and 5 g/hL (Figure 4A). The coarse filtration was efficient to remove the casein up to 40 mL/hL, but a clear band of residual casein estimated at 0.30 mg/L is visible in the wine sample fined with 100 mL/hL of skim milk (Figure 4B and C). The filtration grade that needs to be used is therefore directly proportional to the amount of fining agent used.
¡@According to these results, a fine filtration is sufficient to completely remove fining residues from red wines that were fined with 5 g/hL of Ovocol and 100 mL/hL of skim milk. Since these amounts are rarely exceeded in wineries in the Canton of Vaud, it seems that only the filtration efficiency should be decisive for the detection of allergens in bottled red wines.
Figure 4¡V Elimination of allergic residues in red wine by filtration. Red wines (Pinot noir) were prepared with increasing fining agents and filtered at different filtering grades. (A) 180 £gL of red wine samples were used for the search of ovalbumin (OVA). Ovalbumin was detected in the spiked (0.25 mg/L OVA) red wine. After coarse filtration (AF 15), residual ovalbumin (0.016 mg/L) can be detected in wines fined with 2 and 5 g/hL. AF 71H and AF ST 130 correspond, respectively, to fine and sterile filters. Relative quantification was made directly on this membrane using two points of reference: Blank, 0 ng; Spiked, 45 ng. (B) For the search of casein, 1400 £gL of red wine were used. The unique traces (0.30 mg/L) of caseins were detected in sample fined with 100 mL/hL and coarse filtered. Quantification was made on the membrane shown in (C) using two points of reference: Blank, 0 ng; Spiked (0.25 mg/L), 350 ng. Adjusted volumes considered for quantification are shown in frames. Abs. Q., absolute quantity.
Residual fining agents persistence in white wines
¡@As for red wine, we selected an untreated white wine (Chasselas) and prepared 18 experimental wines as described above. Casein residues are very low and were only visible in coarse filtered 100 mL/hL samples and by overexposing the blot (Figure 5A). Compared to the wine sample spiked with 0.25 mg/L, the levels of these residues are very low, and were estimated to 0.06 mg/L. Very interestingly, contrary to the red wine, in white wine some residual ovalbumin was detected after fine and sterile filtration (Figure 5B and C). Ovalbumin is clearly detected and was estimated at roughly 0.21 mg/L after sterile filtration. If this result could be confirmed with a more precise quantification procedure as shown in Figure 6, it would mean that this wine is still compliant with European legislation, but might require to be labeled for allergenic contents in Switzerland. After fine filtration, the residual ovalbumin was estimated at 0.52 mg/L (Figure 5C) and the sample would be noncompliant with Swiss and European Regulations. Detection of residual fining agents in white wines has already been reported in previous studies (Weber and others 2009; Deckwart and others 2014). In both studies, traces of fining agents were removed by an additional treatment with Bentonite.
Figure 5¡V Detection of fining residues in white wines. White wine fined with increasing amounts of fining agents was prepared and filtered at increasing filter grades. AF 15 = coarse; AF 71H = fine and AF ST 130 = sterile filtration. (A) 1400 £gL of wine was used for the detection of residual casein. Traces are visible (0.06 mg/L) only in the sample prepared with 100 mL/hL and coarse filtered. Quantification was made on the blot using two points of reference: Blank = 0 ng; Spiked (0.25 mg/L) = 350 ng. (B) No traces of ovalbumin were detected in wine samples fined with less than 5 g/hL. Residual ovalbumin was clearly detectable in samples prepared with 5 g/hL and independently of the filtration performed. The amounts of these traces were estimated on the membrane shown in (C) using two points of reference: Blank, 0 ng; Spiked (0.25 mg/L), 45 ng. Adjusted volumes considered for quantification are shown in frames. Abs. Q., absolute quantity.
Interestingly, the allergenic residues were found for both ovalbumin (Deckwart and others 2014) and caseins (Weber and others 2009).
¡@Taken together, our results show that filtration is essential, but that there is a risk of overfining. In red wines, we observed that an efficient filtration can almost completely remove the residues of fining agents, but that some limitations exist. In fact, in the sample prepared with 40 mL/hL of skim milk, no residues were found after coarse filtration, but important traces of allergens were detected if the wine was prepared with 100 mL/hL. In white wine we observed the same effect of overfining, especially in wine prepared with 5 g/hL of ovalbumin. Interestingly, allergens persist after fine and sterile filtration. Ovalbumin is classically used for the fining of red wine, which is rich in polyphenols and tannins. In this case, ovalbumin was used to fine Chasselas white wine that is poor in tannins and polyphenolic compounds, thus preventing ovalbumin to form precipitating complexes that would have been easily removed by filtration.
Western Blotting for an accurate quantification
¡@We mentioned above that a precise quantification is not required by the Swiss Food Regulations. In fact, any allergenic protein that can be found in the finished product must be declared and the product clearly labeled. Nevertheless, for a reason of proportionality between Swiss wine and imported wine we decided, in this study, to target the 0.25 mg/L threshold as required in the European Regulation. In some cases, residual allergenic proteins might be detected and quantified roughly at 0.20 mg/L. Since the sample would be declared compliant at one side of the border and not compliant at the other side of the border, a precise quantification could be necessary. In Figure 6, we show how precise quantification can be made with our Western Blotting method.
¡@For the example we used a red Merlot obtained in a wine cellar of the Canton Ticino that we analyzed for the presence of residual ovalbumin. To avoid unexpected interference we used a Merlot certified without fining obtained from the Oenology laboratory to prepare the Blank control and also for the preparation of the samples of the standard curve. In fact, all the samples loaded on the gels were prepared using exactly the same protocol as the samples to be tested. So, for instance, the 10 ng reference point is a 180 £gL sample of our certified Merlot spiked with 10 ng of Ovocol (Figure 6). Any loss of protein content due to the precipitation protocol would affect the reference points, the sample, and the internal spiked control (0.25 mg/L). For a precise quantification, 4 reference points were used (Figure 6). Considering the precipitation efficiency (50%, Figure 3), and the LOD of 5 ng (Figure 1), the lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) has been fixed at 10 ng (corresponding to 0.05 mg/L) to avoid false negative values. Since we tested the linearity between 5 and 100 ng (Figure 1), the higher point of quantification was fixed at 100 ng (corresponding to 0.5 mg/L). The samples were loaded in duplicate, and also the spiked sample (Figure 6). In order to show that other commercial antibodies for ovalbumin can replace the antibodies PA1-46448 used for the previous results (Figure 1, 4, and 5), in this analysis we used another polyclonal antibody obtained from abcam: ab186717.
¡@The results in Figure 6 show that the sample is allergen-free, as no bands are visible in the sample duplicates (Figure 6). Furthermore, unexpected interference can be excluded, as the spiked sample can be quantified at 0.25 mg/L as expected. Despite the specificity of the antibodies, a lower band at approximately 30 kDa can be observed (Figure 6A and B). On one hand, it might be suggested that this band is the Ovomucoid (28 kDa), as it was already visible in 4A) and 5B). On the other hand, we have at least two reasons to think that it is due to unspecific binding of the antibodies to a wine protein. Firstly, the band intensity is stable throughout the reference points contrary to ovalbumin, which increased 10 fold in intensity from the first to the last point of the standard curve (Figure 6B). Secondly, this band is also visible in the lane of the blank control, which is certified fining-free from
¡@
Table 1¡VAbsence of allergenic wine on the Swiss market.OriginRegionVarietiesOVACASPriceVintageCHValaisChasselas (Fendant)ndnd9.952013CHVaudChasselasndnd8.502013FBordeauxSauvignon Blanc, Semillon?ndnd10.952012CHVaudChasselasndnd21.002012CHValaisSylvaner (Johannisberg)ndnd8.952012CHVaudChasselasndnd5.502013CHVaudChasselasndnd11.502013CHVaudChasselasndnd4.952013CHVaudChasselasndnd9.952013CHVaudChasselasndnd6.352012CHVaudChasselasndnd6.752013CHValaisHumagne Rougendnd8.952011FMedoc?Cabernet Franc, Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, Petit Verdotndnd15.902012CHVaudGamay, Pinot Noirndnd6.952013CHVaudGamaret, Garanoir, Pinot Noirndnd12.952013CHValaisGamay, Pinot Noirndnd16.602013CHValaisPinot Noirndnd10.952013CHVaudGamay, Pinot Noirndnd5.502012CHVaudGamayndnd4.802013CHVaudGamaret, Garanoirndnd9.952013CHVaudGamay, Garanoir, Gamaretndnd9.452012CHValaisCornalin (Humagne Rouge)ndnd12.952012Food safety inspectors sampled 22 bottled wines in groceries of the Canton de Vaud. Ovalbumin (OVA) and caseins (CAS) were not detected. In the table the country of origin, the region, the variety and the vintage are indicated. Prices are in Swiss francs; nd= not detected.
¡@
the oenology laboratory (Figure 6B). For all these reasons we think that this band comes from an unspecific binding to a wine protein, and that is not the ovomucoid protein.
¡@In the previous experiments, we showed that an estimation of the concentration of residual fining agents in wine samples is possible using two points of reference: the blank (0 ng) and the positive control spiked at 0.25 mg/L (Figure 4 and 5). In Figure 6 we show that it is possible to make a precise quantification using duplicates, 4 points of reference and an internal spiked control at 0.25 mg/L. Western Blotting thus appears to be an interesting method for both a qualitative analysis with an estimation of residual proteins, and a quantitative analysis. Furthermore, an important point worth mention is that Western Blotting allows the visualization of unspecific binding of the antibodies to wine proteins. Thus, these bands can be clearly identified and excluded from the quantification.
Official wine sampling
¡@Confident that Western Blotting can be applied to real bottled wine, and to an important number of samples, we asked the food safety inspectors of the Canton of Vaud to officially collect samples in groceries stores. The sampled wines were principally composed of local wines, and for reasons of confidentiality the names of wines and wine growers are not mentioned here. In fact, these analyses were performed under the supervision of the food control authority of the Canton of Vaud, and results were handled for an official decision. To be exhaustive, we searched for traces of ovalbumin and casein in every sample, independently of the type of wine. Eleven red wines and 11 white wines were found free of allergenic traces, as all the analyzed samples were negative for both ovalbumin and casein (Table 1). These results corroborated previously reported studies (Restani and others 2012; Mattarozzi and others 2014). Restani and others (2012) analyzed 63 commercial wines for traces of caseinates by ELISA and did not find any positive samples. Mattarozzi and others (2014) used an MS-based method to search for residual casein and ovalbumin in 20 bottled red wines, and all the samples were negative. Weber and other (2009) searched for traces of casein in 61 commercial white wines by ELISA, and interestingly found 3 positive samples. In these wines, the residual fining agents were estimated to 0.4 mg/L. Thus, the presence of fining residues is not common (Restani and others 2012; Mattarozzi and others 2014) but cannot be excluded (Weber and others 2009). In our study, 22 samples were analyzed and were identified to be free from casein and ovalbumin. Also for the food control authority these samples were allergen-free and did not require any special labeling on the bottles.
Conclusion
¡@Providing that specific antibodies are available, the Western Blotting technique is a reliable and reproducible technique that can be applied for the search of fining agents in finished wines. Furthermore, we also showed that Western Blotting can be used for a precise quantification. As mentioned earlier in this report, the most limiting aspect of Western Blotting is the number of samples that can be analyzed per assay. Nevertheless, contrary to MS-based methods, this technique is based on fundamental biochemical methods and does not require sophisticated equipment, and might thus be easily used in other food control laboratories all over the world. The ELISA method, in comparison to immunoblotting, is a very simple method that does not require sophisticated equipment and can easily be used in almost every laboratory. Furthermore the ELISA method allows the analysis of a large number of samples per essay. Nevertheless, contrary to the ELISA method, the migration of proteins by electrophoresis enables the separation of the proteins of the wine samples by their molecular weight. Thus, the targeted proteins can be clearly recognized avoiding that unspecific proteins are taken into account (Figure 6). Finally, in this study we precipitated wine samples and targeted the legal threshold under European Regulation of 0.25 mg/L, which is currently the most restrictive legislation in the world (Losito and others 2013). However, using a larger volume of sample, it would be easy to increase the sensitivity of the analysis. For example, using 1400 £gl for the analysis or residual ovalbumin, the limit of detection of 5 ng would correspond to a concentration of approximately 0.005 mg/L.
¡@In this study, we showed that fine filtration completely removes fining residues from red wine fined with 5 g/hL of Ovocol and 100 mL/hL of skim milk. In white wines, which are traditionally fined with caseinates, residual casein is absent in fine-filtered samples. Interestingly, in white wines fined with 5 g/hL of Ovocol, residual ovalbumin estimated at 0.52 mg/L and 0.21 mg/L was detected after fine and sterile filtration respectively. We suggest that the lower content of tannins and polyphenolic compounds in white wine might prevent the formation of aggregates with ovalbumin. As a result, the soluble protein may not be removed by filtration. Finally, for the first time in Switzerland, 22 bottled wines were officially taken, analyzed and identified as allergenfree. Moreover, the cantonal food control authority stipulated that the potentially allergenic residues were absent from the analyzed wines, and that these wines did not require a special labeling on the bottle. Despite these results, it is too early to make general conclusions on Swiss wines, and numerous analyses still need to be done. To reach this goal, official wine controls will be conducted in collaboration with the official food control authorities of other Cantons of Switzerland.
Acknowledgments
¡@We thank the Cantonal chemist Dr Christian Richard and the Food safety Inspectors of the Canton of Vaud for their kind collaboration. We are thankful to Dr Joelle Rolli, Carole Koestel and? Dr Johannes Rosti for fruitful discussions and sharing results. This? study was supported by the public administration of the Canton of Vaud and was the fruit of a joint effort by the ¡§Service de la consommation et des affaires vet? erinaires¡¨, and the ¡§Service de? l¡¦agriculture¡¨.
Author Contributions
¡@Simone Zanetti designed the study, conducted practical experiments, interpreted results, coordinates takings and wrote the manuscript. Philippe Meyer prepared wine samples and made comments on the manuscript.
References
Benhamou AH, Caubet J-C, Eigenmann PA, Nowak-Wegrzyn A, Marcos CP, Reche M, Urisu A. 2010. State of the art and new horizons in the diagnosis and management of egg allergy. Allergy 65:283¡V9.
Caira S, Pizzano R, Picariello G, Pinto G, Cuollo M, Chianese L, Addeo F. 2012. Allergenicity of milk proteins. In: Hurley WL, editor. Milk protein. Biochemistry, genetics and molecular biology. Available from: http://www.intechopen.com/books/milk-protein/ allergenicity-of-milk-proteins. Accessed Jun 26, 2015.
Deckwart M, Carstens C, Webber-Witt M, Schafer V, Eichhorn L, Schr? oter F, Fischer M,? Brockow K, Christmann M, Paschke-Kratzin A. 2014. Impact of wine manufacturing practice on the occurence of fining agents with allergenic potential. Food Addit Contam: Part A 31(11):1805¡V17.
EAACI. European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology. 2013. Food Allergy & Anaphylaxis Public Declaration. Available from: http://www.eaaci.org. Accessed Feb 18, 2015.
European Commission. 2007. Regulation 1234/2007. Off J Eur Union L299:1¡V149. European Commission. 2009. Regulation amended by Council Regulation 491/2009. Off J Eur Union L154:1¡V56.
European Commission. 2012. Commission implementing regulation 579/2012. Off J Eur Union L171:4¡V7.
FSO. Federal Statistical Office, Internet page. http://www.bfs.admin.ch/. Accessed Feb 18, 2015.
Laemmli UK. 1970. Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4. Nature 227:680¡V5.
Losito I, Introna B, Monaci L, Minella S, Palmisano F. 2013. Development of a method for the quantification of caseinate traces in Italian commercial white wines based on liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-ion trap-mass spectrometry. J Agric Food Chem 61:12436¡V44.
Mastro R, Hall M. 1999. Protein delipidation and precipitation by tri-n-butylphosphate, acetone, and methanol treatment for isoelectric focusing and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Anal Biochem 273:313¡V5.
Mattarozzi M, Milioli M, Bignardi C, Elviri L, Corradini C, Careri M. 2014. Investigation of different sample pre-treatment routes for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry detection of caseins and ovalbumin in fortified red wine. Food Control 38:82¡V 87
Monaci L, Losito I, Palmisano F, Visconti A. 2010. Identification of allergenic milk proteins markers in fined white wines by capillary liquid chromatography-electrospray ionizationtandem mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr 1217(26):4300¡V05.
Monaci L, Losito I, Palmisano F, Godula M, Visconti A. 2011. Towards the quantification of residual milk allergens in caseinate-fined white wines using HPLC coupled with single-stage Orbitrap mass spectrometry. Food Addit Contam: Part A 25(10):1304¡V14.
Monaci L, Losito I, DeAngelis E, Pilolli R, Visconti A. 2013. Multi-allergen quantification of fining-related egg and milk proteins in white wines by high-resolution mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 27:2009¡V18.
OCVP. Office Cantonal de la Viticulture et de la Promotion, Controle official de? la vendange 2014. Available from: http://www.vd.ch/themes/economie/agriculture/ economie-vitivinicole/controle-de-la-vendange/. Accessed Feb 21, 2015.
OEDAI. Ordonnance du Departement f? ed? eral de l¡¦Interieure du 23 novembre 2005 sur? l¡¦etiquetage et la publicit? e des denr? ees alimentaires. Etat le 25 mars 2014. Available? from: http://www.admin.ch/opc/fr/classified-compilation/20050161/index.html. Accessed Jun 25, 2015.
OIV. Organisation International de la Vigne et du Vin. 2012. Criteria OIV-MA-AS315-23. Available from: http://www.oiv.int/oiv/info/enmethodesinternationalesvin. Accessed Feb 17, 2015.
(Ordonnance sur le Vin). Ordonnance sur la Viticulture et l¡¦importation du Vin du 14 Novembre 2007. Etat le 1 janvier 2015. Available from: http://www.admin.ch/ opc/fr/classified-compilation/20071607. Accessed Jun 25, 2015.
Pilolli R, De Angelis E, Godula M, Visconti A, Monaci L. 2014. OrbitrapTM monostage MS versus hybrid linear ion trap MS: application to multi-allergen screening in wine. J Mass Spectrom 49:1254¡V63.
Restani P, Uberti F, Danzi R, Ballabio C, Pavanello F, Tarantino C. 2012. Absence of allergenic residues in experimental and commercial wines fined with caseinates. Food Chemistry 134:1438¡V45.
Rolland JM, Apostolou E, Deckert K, deLeon MP, Douglass JA, Glaspole IN, Bailey M, Stockley CS, O¡¦Hehir RE. 2006. Potential food allergens in wine: Double-blind, placebo-controlled trial and basophil activation analysis. Nutrition 22:882¡V8.
Styger G, Prior B, Bauer FF. 2011. Wine flavor and aroma. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 38:1145¡V 59.
Vassilopoulou E, Karathanos A, Siragakis G, Giavi S, Sinaniotis A, Douladiris N, FernandezRivas M, Clausen M, Papadopoulos NG. 2011. Risk of allergic reactions to wine, in milk, egg and fish-allergic patients. Clin Transl Allergy 1:10.
Weber P, Steinhart H, Paschke A. 2009. Determination of the bovine food allergen casein in white wines by quantitative indirect ELISA, SDS-PAGE, Western blot and immunostaining. J Agric Food Chem 57:8399¡V405.
Zhu J, Pouillot R, Kwegyir-Afful EK, Luccioli S, Gendel SM. 2015. A retrospective analysis of allergic reaction severities and minimal eliciting doses for peanut, milk, egg, and soy oral food challenges. Food Chem Toxicol 80:92¡V100.

Dosage of allergen traces by immunoblot . . .
¡@
Dosage of allergen traces by immunoblot . . .
¡@
	T2	Journal of Food Science  Vol. 00, Nr. 0, 2015
¡@
	Vol. 00, Nr. 0, 2015  Journal of Food Science	T3	
¡@

¡@
	 Journal of Food Science	T1	
¡@
Dosage of allergen traces by immunoblot . . .
¡@
Dosage of allergen traces by immunoblot . . .
¡@
	T2	Journal of Food Science  Vol. 00, Nr. 0, 2015
¡@
	Vol. 00, Nr. 0, 2015  Journal of Food Science	T3	
¡@
Dosage of allergen traces by immunoblot . . .
¡@
	Vol. 00, Nr. 0, 2015  Journal of Food Science	T3	
¡@
